hello everybody this video is going to
be about the mandibular canine first
we'll go over the shape of the tooth
from buccal or lingual view the tooth is
going to be shaped like a Pentagon
I'm a mesial distal view it's gonna be
triangular and then from an incisal it's
gonna be shaped like a diamond or you
might see it described as being oval
okay the shape you'll see a couple
questions come up on this occasionally
regarding the outline of the facial and
so the facial outline when viewed from
the proximal is made up of one
continuous arc and so if you look at the
shape right here it's just smooth and
it's one arc and this is different then
the max lurking on which has three
planes and I put board question all day
long because you'll see this a lot on
the practice tests alright the mesial
outline when viewed from the facial from
the contact area down to the root apex
is pretty straight the mesial axial
surface is going to be parallel to the
long axis of the tooth so on the
mandibular canine we've got two areas of
the tooth we can take questions from
regarding shape so the facial outline is
going to be one continuous arc and then
the mesial is going to be pretty much
parallel to the long axis of the root
and you'll occasionally get questions
and ask something like you have two
teeth in your hands and it will describe
the tooth anatomy to you and you'll have
to decide if the tooth is on the right
side of the mouth or the left side of
the mouth and so this is a good way to
determine that in a contact on the
mesial it's gonna be in the incisal
third and then on the distal it's gonna
be in the middle third okay size is
another area that you'll see a lot of
questions on this tooth has the longest
crown you'll see questions on that and
then it's the second
longest tooth overall so we're talking
crown plus root here so the maxilla
canine is the longest and then it has a
second longest route and remember the
maxillary canine has the longest route
you'll see questions about the facial
lingual measurement in cane so if we're
looking at the facial right here and
then removing to the lingual the facial
lingual measurement is greater than the
mesial distal measurement and so it's a
longer tooth in a facial lingual
direction than it is in a mesial
direction in a mesial distal direction
and that is the same as the maxillary
canine alright lingual anatomy is one
way to distinguish this tooth from the
maxillary canine so if you recall when
we talked about the maxillary canine in
the last video we mentioned the lingual
Ridge and how there's some very
distinctive anatomy on the lingual of
the tooth whereas the mandibular canine
it's pretty flat on the lingual side so
it's relatively flat in the fossa area
poorly developed in the marg marginal
Ridge area and then has a poorly
developed cingulum and so this is
another way that you can distinguish
upper canines from lower canines
all right cusp tip you'll see this kind
of lingo on the test a lot so the cusps
tip is and this is if you're looking at
it from an incisal direction the cusps
tip is lingual to the facial lingual
long axis bisector so here's a question
for you from an in sisal view which
surface is going to be more visible the
facial or the lingual surface and so
here we've got the cusps tip and if we
go back to the previous slide the cusps
tip is lingual tends towards the lingual
and so we're gonna see more of the
facial than we are the lingual all right
the root this is gonna be the only tooth
with a route that's inclined easily and
anytime we've got an only anytime a
tooth isn't only or an exception
we got a
remember that because they like to ask
questions on that kind of thing so the
ant this tooth is the anterior tooth
most likely to have a bifurcated root
okay and so that's more often than
maxillary canine maxillary central and
all the rest of let me see here so
that's that's something you might see
come up occasionally that's it for today
everybody thanks for tuning in